# Indexes

A table index is a replica of a subset of table's attributes that are organized &/or sorted for efficient access using a subset of those attributes.

Its DBMS's job to figure out the best index to use for a query.

There is a tradeoff overhead on number of indexes to create per database - storage & maintainable overhead.

## B+ Tree
DEFAULT INDEXING METHOD
Self balancing tree data keeps data sorted and allows searches, sequential access, insertions, and deletions in logarithmic time.
- Generalization of BST in that a node can have more than 2 children.
- Optimized for systems that read and write large blocks of data.

M-way search tree with following properties:
- Perfectly balanced (every leaf node is at same depth)
- Every node other than the root, is atleast half-full. (i.e. has atleast M/2 - 1 <= children <= M-1>)
- Every inner node has k keys and k+1 non-null children.

### Nodes
Every B+ tree node is comprised of an array of key-value pairs.
- The keys are derived form the attributes that the index is based on.
- The values will differ based on whether the node is classified as an inner node or a leaf node.

#### Leaf Node:
Meta: Level, Slots, Prev, Next
Sorted Keys & values (different arrays as they are of different sizes)

Values:
Approach #1: Record Ids
Approach #2: Record the actual data

#### B-tree vs B+ tree
B-tree stored keys and values in all nodes. More space efficient since each key only appears once.
A B+ tree only stores values in leaf nodes. Inner nodes only guide the search process. In B+ tree we just modify leaf nodes.

This helps us in concurrency. We can have multiple threads modifying leaf nodes without worrying about the inner nodes. Whereas in B-tree, we would have to add multiple latches. More on this later.

### B+ Tree Insertion

1) Find the correct leaf node (L) to insert.
2) Put that entry into L in sorted order.
3) If L has enough space, done.
4) Otherwise split L keys into L and a new node L2.
   - Redistribute keys between L and L2. Copy up middle key to parent. (recursive bottom up)
   - Insert index entry pointing to L2 into parent of L.

### B+ Tree Deletion

1) Find the correct leaf node (L) to delete.
2) Remove entry
3) If L is atleast half-full, done.
4) If L has only M/2 - 1 entries, borrow from sibling.
   - If sibling has more than M/2 - 1 entries, borrow from sibling.
   - If redistribution, merge L with sibling.

If merge occurred, must delete entry (pointing to L or sibling) from parent L.

### Practical
Typical Fill-Factor: 67-69%;

#### Clustered Index
The table is stored in sort order based specified by primary key.
Used when we want the data to be sorted on the physical layer (disk).
- Can be either heap or index organized storage.

#### Selection Conditions
Handling when there are multiple values for an index key.

#### Node Size
The slower the device - the larger the optimal node for a B+ tree.

#### Merge Threshold
Some DBMSs do not always merge nodes when it is half full. Delaying a merge operation may reduce the number of reorganization. It may also be better to just let underflow exist and then periodically rebuild entire tree. (Maintenance Time)

#### Variable Length Keys
- Pointers: Store the keys as pointers to the tuple's attribute (not used)
- Variable Length Nodes - Requires carefully memory management (not used)
- Padding - Add pad the key to max length of key type (postgres uses this, wasted space)
- KeyMap/Indirection - Sorted Key Map - with offset to actual key-value pair.

#### Non-Unique Indexes
Duplicate keys can also be in different nodes.
- Use the same leaf node layout but store duplicate keys multiple times. (Common)
- Store each key only once and maintain a LinkedList of unique values.

#### Duplicate Keys
- Append record Id - add tuple's unique recordId (pageId & offset - unique location of every tuple) as part of the key to ensure all keys are unique. The DBMS can still use partial keys to find tuples. (Increases size)
- Overflow leaf nodes - allow leaf nodes to spill into overflow nodes that contain duplicate keys. (Complicated)

#### Intra-node search
Minor optimization. Main goal is to reduce disk IO.
- Linear
- BinarySearch (most common)
- Interpolation - Approximate location of desired key based on distribution of keys. Improved linear search.

#### Prefix Compression
Sorted keys in same leaf are likely to have the same prefix. Instead of storing the entire key each time, extract common prefix and store only unique suffix for each key.

#### Suffix Truncation
The keys in the inner nodes are only used to direct traffic. We don't need the entire key. Storing a minimum prefix that is needed to correctly route probes into the index.

#### Bulk insertion
The fastest way to build a B+ tree is to sort the keys and then build the index from the bottom up.

#### Pointer Swizzling
Node use pageIds to reference other nodes in the index. The DBMS get the memory location from the page table during traversal.
Only - If a page is pinned in buffer pool (will have same address), then we can store raw pointers instead of pageIds. This avoids address lookups from page table.
When Pinning: Pinning inner nodes can be helpful.
Very common.

Most DBMS automatically create an index to enforce integrity constraints (primary key, unique) but not referential constraints. (Foreign Keys)

#### Partial Indexes
Create an index on a subset of the entire table. This potentially reduces its size and the amount of overhead to maintain it.
One common use case is to partition indexes by date ranges. - (e.g. 1 index per month)

#### Covering Indexes
If all fields needed to process the query are available in an index, then DBMS does not need to retrieve the tuple. This reduces contention on the DBMS buffer pool.
Embed additional columns in indexes to support index-only queries. These extra columns are only stored in leaf nodes & are NOT part of the search key.

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx ON table (col1, col2, col3) INCLUDE (col4, col5);
```

#### Functional/Expression Indexes
An index does not need to store keys in same way that they appear in their base table.
Can also be achieved via partial indexes.

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx ON users (EXTRACT(dow FROM login_time));
```

The inner node keys in a B+ tree cannot tell you whether a key exists in the index. You must always traverse to the leaf node. This means you could have atleast one buffer pool page miss per level in the tree just to find out a key does not exist.


## Trie Index
(Digital Search Tree, Prefix Tree)

Shape only depends on key space & lengths
- Does not depend on existing keys or insertion order
- Does not require re-balancing operations.

All ops are O(k) where k is the length of the key.
- The path to leaf node represent the key itself
- Keys are stored implicitly in path to leaf node

#### Trie Ket Span
The span of a trie level is number of bits that each partial key/digit represents.

Optimizations:
- Reduce each trie node by storing only the pointers. Horizontal Compression.
- Omit all nodes with only a single child. Vertical Compression. Also called a Patricia Tree or Radix Tree.

#### Modifications
In case of deletion remove the extra path nodes, in case of single path.

Observations:
These are good for range queries, point queries.


## Inverted Indexes
Stores a mapping of words to records that contain those words in the target attribute. Sometimes called a "search index" or "full-text index".

Design Decisions:
- What to store ?
Index needs to store atleast the words contained in each record. Can also store freq, pos & other metadata.
- When to update ?
Maintain auxillary data structures  to stage updates & then batch update.