# Database Storage 1 & 2

## Storage Hierarchy

Volatile -> Fast Random Access -> Byte Addressable
- CPU Registers (Advanced)
- CPU Cache (0.5ns - L1, 7ns - L2) (Advanced)
- DRAM (100ns)

Non-Volatile -> Fast Sequential Access -> Block Addressable (need 64bytes ? -> take whole 4kb page & pick out 64bytes)
- SSD (150,000ns)
- HDD (10,000,000ns)
- Network Storage

# Problem 1 - How DBMS represents the database in files on disk

The DBMS stores a database as file(s) on disk & OS does not know anything about contents of the files.

The storage manager is responsible for maintaining the database files on disk. It organizes files as a collection of pages. Each page is a fixed size block of data & has an unique identifier. Containers tuples, meta-data, indexes, log record etc.

3 different pages :
Hardware Page - lowest level, 4kb
OS Page,
Database Page (512B - 16KB)

Different DBMS manage pages in files on disk in different ways.

Heap File Organization - dbms maintains special pages that track the location of data pages in the database files, also records number of free slots/page. They should be in sync.

LinkedList Structure - Head pointer points has pointer 2 lists (full page list & empty(or partial) pages)

## Page Organization

Has header:
- Page Size
- Checksum
- DBMS version
- Transaction Visibility
- Compression Info

Data: 2 ways : tuple oriented or log oriented

## Log Oriented

Stores log records -> insert, delete, update actions in a a page. FAST writes. Slow reads. To read you need scan all records & recreate the tuple.
## Tuple Oriented

Tuple Oriented - each tuple is stored in a fixed size slot. Each slot has a header that contains the length of the tuple. If the tuple is deleted, the slot is marked as free. If the tuple is updated, the old tuple is marked as deleted & a new tuple is inserted in the same slot.

Each tuple is assigned a unique record identifier (Most commonly - page_id + offset/slot)
In case of delete the empty space is concatenated back based on the implementation

### Tuple Layout

Essentially a sequence of bytes. DBMS interprets the bytes into attributes & values.
Each tuple has a header:
- Visibility Info ( transactionID / concurrency control)
- Bit Map for NULL Values

Attributes are stored in order specified in schema.
Most system don't store different tuples in different pages.

Denormalized tuple data: (relation b/w tables - foreign keys n all) (not recommended)
In these cases, different tuples can be stored in same page as they are related and queries together often. But for end user they are different tables.

TODO: Understand more on why foreign keys are frowned upon by most architects.

### Fixed Precision Numbers

Numeric data types with arbitrary precision & scale. Typically store in a exact variable length binary representation with additional meta-data. User when round errors are unacceptable. (usually twice as slow than regular numbers)

```cpp
// postgres struct
typedef unsigned char NumericDigit
typedef struct{
    int n_digits; // number of digits in the number
    int weight; // weight of the most significant (first) digit
    int sign; // 0 = positive, 1 = negative / NaN
    int scale; // scale factor
    NumericDigit *digits; // digit storage
} numeric
```

### Large values

To store values larger than a page, dbms uses separate overflow pages. Tuple header contains a pointer to the overflow page.

External Value Storage -> Stores pointer to external file (HDD etc) in header. DBMS can NOT manipulate the file. No durability & transaction protections.

A paper (To BLOB or Not to BLOB) found out that anything over 256KB you want to store in external file instead of overflow pages. No hard limits.

### OLTP vs OLAP

OLTP - Online Transaction Processing - simple queries that updates a small amount of data that is related to a single entity. (single row) (e-commerce, bank) (row store)
OLAP - Online Analytical Processing - complex queries that reads a large amount of data that is related to multiple entities. (multiple rows) (sales, marketing) (column store)

DBMS can store tuples in different ways that are better for either OLTP or OLAP.

### NSM

N-ary Storage Model - DBMS stores all attributes for a single tuple contiguously in a page. Ideal for OLTP. Insert heavy & single entity focused.
Advantages: Fast inserts, updates, deletes. Good for queries that need entire tuple.
Disadvantages: Not good for scanning large portions of table and/or subset of attributes.

### DSM

Decomposition Storage Model - DBMS stores attributes for a single tuple in different pages. Ideal for OLAP. Read heavy & multiple entity focused.
So all values of a single attribute are stored in a single page. Once we have page & filtered what we need, we need to identify the tuples ?

- Fix-length offsets : Each value is the same length for an attribute (almost always used)
- Embedded TupleIds : Each value is stored with its tupleID

Advantages: reduced wasted I/O because dbms only reads the data it needs, better query processing & data compression (as all values of a single attribute are stored in a single page)
Disadvantages: Slow inserts, updates, deletes because of tuple splitting/stitching.

### Ebay's DSM & NSM

Frontend OLTP systems (Mysql,MongoDB etc), backend OLAP systems. Stream out the old data to OLAP systems when you don't need it anymore. Ebay retains only auctions of last 90 days in OLTP systems & rest in OLAP systems (data warehouses) for analytics. Keeping their OLTP systems trimmed.

HTAP - Hybrid Transactional & Analytical Processing - DBMS that supports both OLTP & OLAP. (Postgres, Mysql, Oracle, SQL Server)